---
title: Abstract
order: 1
container: header
---
Method validation for biodetection technologies requires high purity test materials.  Traditional methods for evaluating test material purity, e.g. polymerase chain reaction (PCR), require prior knowledge of the contaminant identity and have a limited level of detection (LOD).  Whole genome sequencing using next generation sequencing (NGS) technology addresses these limitations by providing a non-target specific approach and a lower LOD due to the large number of reads generated in a sequencing run – ten thousand to over one million reads.  Here we present a novel application of the pathoscope sequence analysis program (http://sourceforge.net/projects/pathoscope/) coupled with an expanded reference dataset to evaluate test material purity and validate material identity using simulated whole genome sequencing datasets.  To evaluate the ability of pathoscope to identify contaminants in test materials, in silico generated datasets for \Sexpr{length(unique(single_matches$input_filename))} organisms from \Sexpr{length(unique(org_df$genus))} different genera \textit{\Sexpr{str_c(unique(org_df$genus)[-length(unique(org_df$genus))], collapse = ", ")}} and \textit{\Sexpr{unique(org_df$genus)[length(unique(org_df$genus))]}}.   First, the results from the analysis of the single organism datasets using \textit{pathoscope} served as a baseline for the simulated contaminat analysis. Simulated datasets of 250 bp paried end reads with reads classified at the genus level provided suitable levels of specificity to identify potential test material contaminants.  To determine the method LOD, simulated reads from \Sexpr{length(unique(contam_matches$org2))} were mixed at known proportions. All contaminant organisms excluding \textit{B. anthracis} and \textit{F. tularensis} were detected at 0.05 \% for all but 5 of the 29 the simulated test materials.  The detection levels for B. anthracis amd F. tularensis ranged between 5 \% down to 0.25 \%.  The approach presented here provides a sample independent, highly sensitive, and specific method for evaluating test material purity.  With the rapid decrease in NGS costs, this approach is a viable alternative to PCR based methods for evaluating test material purity and can be applied in a high throughput manner for screening panels of test materials.