---
title: "Introduction"
order: 2
---
Rapid, sensitive and accurate assays for detecting bacterial pathogens in food, water, clinical samples, and  suspicious biothreats is critical to public health and safety (REF).  Biodetection assays must be evaluated for assay sensitivity and specificity prior to deployment as well in the hands of the user to instill confidence in the actions made based on the assay results __REF: Ieven2013,International2011,EPA2004,ISO/TS2010,Guide1998,Feldsine2002__.  Test materials are used to validate assay performance.  Test materials can be either purified cultures, genomic DNA or whole cells spiked into a matrix __REF: EPA2004,ISO/TS2010,CLSI2010__.  Before being used to evaluate a biodetection assay the test material itself must be validated in terms of purity and identity to eliminate false positive results due to test material contaminants or false negative due to the test material being the wrong strain __REF: CLSI2010__.  There are a number of potential sources of microbial contaminants  including the stock culture, the preservation medium, as well as airborne and laboratory contaminants __REF: Marron2013,Shrestha2013,Tanner1998__.   
 
Current methods for evaluating test material purity include polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays, metagenomics, and whole genome sequencing based approaches.  One PCR assay was developed to analyze protist cultures.  This PCR assay uses endpoint PCR for prokaryotes and eukaryotes with template dilutions __REF: Marron2013__.  The benefit to PCR-based approaches is that they can be cost effective and fast if an applicable protocol exists.   However, PCR assays can only target specific contaminants.  While PCR assays can detect contaminants, this approach does not scale effectively for multiple contaminants and test materials. The bioinformatics tools developed to identify contaminants in metagenomic datasets, which include sequencing data from all organisms in a sample, can also be used to evaluate test material purity.  For example DeconSeq __REF: Schmieder2011__ and a similar method QC-Chain __REF: Zhou2013__ were developed to identify contaminants based on analysis of 16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid (rRNA) gene sequences or comparison of a subset of reads to a reference database using Basic local alignment search tool (BLAST).  Metagonomic-based methods are able to identify contaminants without any prior knowledge or assumptions regarding the identity of the organism(s).  However, methods based on 16S rRNA gene identification have limited resolution, as 16S rRNA sequences can only provide genus level taxonomic resolution at best.  Methods using BLAST-based searches represent a broader scale approach but are limited by the accuracy of the BLAST classification method.   The benefit to using metagenomic tools developed is that prior knowledge of the identity of the contaminant is not required; however this method is unable to identify contaminants to the strain level.   

Another approach to evaluating test material purity is through shotgun whole genome sequencing, sequence all DNA in a single organism sample.  A recently published bioinformatics method, _PathoScope_, was developed to detect pathogens and identify strains using whole genome sequencing data __REF: Francis2013__.  This method benefits from the large sample size obtained using next generation sequencing for higher sensitivity and leverages algorithm advances for whole genome sequence mapping.  Mapping algorithms determine the optimal placement of reads relative to a reference sequence __REF: Schbath2012__.  Reads are either uniquely or ambiguously mapped.  For uniquely mapped reads only a single optimal mapping location is identified, whereas for ambiguously mapped reads multiple optimal mapping locations are identified.  Pathoscope uses the number of reads that uniquely map to different genomes in the reference database to assign ambiguously mapped reads, reads that align equally well to multiple reference sequences.  The primary benefits to shotgun whole genome sequencing and subsequent pathoscope analysis approach are that prior knowledge of the contaminant is not required and it has the potential for higher sensitivity compared to other methods.  However, the main limitation to this method is the size of the reference database, namely that the genome of the contaminant or a closely related organism must be present in the database for the contaminant to be detected.  In this work, we developed a novel method to measure the purity of single organism test materials built upon the pathoscope software for pathogen detection.  This method is based on whole genome sequencing and utilizes _PathoScope_ with an expanded reference database.  We will first present the specificity of the method using simulated data for single organisms.  Then, evaluate sensitivity of the method using simulated datasets generated to represent contaminated test material.  